---
sidebar_position: 6
title: Transaction
sidebar_label: Transaction
---

A transaction in Alephium denotes the process of transferring an asset, such as Alephium's native cryptocurrency ALPH, tokens, or contract data, from some addresses to other ones within the network. Beyond facilitating the exchange of value, transactions also play a pivotal role in executing smart contracts. These contracts allow for the implementation of programmable logic, enabling a diverse range of functionalities and decentralized applications on the Alephium blockchain.

## Prerequisites

It's important that you understand the [UTXO model](/core-tech/stateful-utxo)

## Overview of a transaction

A transaction typically includes the following components:

* Inputs: list of previous unspent outputs, transaction's signatures will prove that those inputs can be spent.
* Outputs: list of recipients address with given amount of values (such as ALPH)
* Transaction Fee: A small amount of cryptocurrency paid by the sender to to get his transaction included in a block.

When a transaction is created, it undergoes a validation process to ensure that the inputs have sufficient funds, the transaction is properly signed, UTXO model is respected and other relevant conditions are met.
Once validated, the transaction is added to a [block](/core-tech/block) and subsequently added to one of the blockchain of the Alephium's network, according to the groups of the addresses involved in the transaction, becoming a permanent part of Alephium's history.

### Transaction model
* unsigned: The unsigned transaction, containing the UTXO assets
* scriptExecutionOk: Does the script exectuted correctly?
* contractInputs: Inputs coming from a contracts
* generatedOutputs: Auto generated outputs from contracts
* inputSignatures: signatures of assets inputs
* scriptSignatures: signatures of contracts inputs


`unsigned` and `inputSignatures` are usually information coming from the sender of the transaction, that can be build manually. Other fields are auto-generated by contracts.

### Unsigned Transaction model
* txId: Unique identifier of the transaction
* version: version of the transaction
* networkId: 0 = mainnet, 1 = testnet, other = devnet
* scriptOpt: TBD
* gasAmount: amount of gas,
* gasPrice: price of the gas,
* inputs: asset inputs
* fixedOutputs: asset outputs

Transaction fee are computed with: `gasAmount * gasPrice`
From the UTXO model, the transaction has to respect: `sum(inputs) = sum(outputs) + tx fee`
